---
layout: post
title: So you think you can count?
excerpt: "Permutations and combinations"
comments: true
categories: articles
share: true
tags: [probability]
---

Think you can count? We're in a cafeteria with $$n=4$$ different fruits in a fruit basket.

:banana:
:strawberry:
:watermelon:
:green_apple:

For counting *permutations*, the order matters. For counting *combinations*, the order doesn't matter.

# Permutations

Here, we consider the choices of fruit among our three friends, Christina, Joaquin, and Ezra. We will count the different outcomes in the cafeteria; these will be permutations because order matters; Christina, Joaquin, and Ezra are in line at the cafeteria.

### Case 1. Christina, Joaquin, and Ezra each select one fruit. There are plenty of bananas, strawberries, watermelons, and green apples to go around. How many different outcomes are there? e.g., one outcome is Christina and Ezra select a banana and Joaquin selects a watermelon.

Each person individually has four different outcomes. Since there are three people and any one person's choice does not change the possible outcomes of the other people, the number of outcomes are $$4\times4\times4\times4=4^3$$.

More generally, if we had a choice of $$k$$ fruits among $$n$$ people, the number of outcomes would be $$k^n$$. This is called a permutation with repetition.

### Case 2. Christina, Joaquin, and Ezra each select one fruit. Now, however, there is only a banana, green apple, and strawberry remaining in the fruit basket. How many different outcomes are there?

Now, since Christina is in line first, she has a choice between all three fruits. However, after she chooses one, there are only 2 choices remaining for Joaquin; Ezra gets one choice.
So, here the number of different outcomes is $$3\times 2 \times 1$$.

More generally, if we have $$n$$ people lined up to select $$n$$ fruits, there are $$n(n-1)(n-2)\cdots (3)(2)(1)$$. This is written using a factorial, $$n!$$. 

### Case 3. Christina, Joaquin, and Ezra each select one fruit. Now, however, there is a banana, green apple, strawberry, and watermelon remaining in the fruit basket. How many different outcomes are there?

Now, there are four fruits for three people. Following the logic above, Christina has four choices, Joaquin has three choices, and Ezra has two choices. So there are $$4\times 3 \times 2$$ outcomes.

More generally, if we have $$k$$ people lined up to select $$n$$ fruits, for $$n\geq k$$, there are $$n(n-1)(n-2) \cdots (n-k+1)$$. i.e., there are $$k$$ factors here (one for each person). Note that this can be written as $$n! / (n-k)!$$. This is called a $$k$$-permutation of $$n$$.

### Case 4. Christina, Joaquin, and Ezra each selected one fruit. We know that, all together, Christina, Joaquin, and Ezra selected two bananas and a watermelon, but we don't know who selected which fruit. How many different possibilities are there? e.g., one possibility is that Christina selected the watermelon and Joaquin and Ezra each selected a banana.

Here, we are looking for how many different ways to order two bananas and a watermelon. This seems a lot like case 2, where we essentially counted the orderings of three different objects. But, in this scenario, the two bananas are indistinguishable. i.e., if we could label the bananas with 1 and 2, the ordering:
:watermelon: :banana:1 :banana:2
is the same as
:watermelon: :banana:2 :banana:1
here since they both describe the scenario where Christina gets the watermelon and Joaquin and Ezra get a banana. That is, $$3!$$ overcounts the number of possibilities because we can switch the order of the bananas and they represent the same outcome; we must then divide by the number of ways we can permute the bananas if they were distinguishable. Since there are two bananas, we need to divide by $$2!=2$$. Thus, there are $$3$$ outcomes here:

1. :watermelon: :banana: :banana:
2. :banana: :watermelon: :banana:
3. :banana: :banana: :watermelon:

From the list above, we could also reduce this problem to: who gets the watermelon? Then, there are only 3 choices.

More generally, if we have $$n$$ total fruits and $$k$$ different kinds of indistinguishable fruit, the number of permutations are

$$\frac{n!}{n_1! n_2! \cdots n_k!}$$, where $$n_i$$ is the number of fruits of kind $$i$$. The numbers in the denominator are to count for the indistinguishability of the fruits, as in this case. This is called a multiset permutation.

# Combinations

Here, we will see examples where the ordering of the fruits does not matter by considering only Christina's selection of fruit from the basket.

### Case 5. Christina selects two different fruits from the fruit basket with four different fruits (a banana, strawberry, watermelon, and green apple) and puts them on her tray. How many different outcomes are there? Here, the ordering of the fruit does not matter.

Starting off as with permutations, where ordering matters, Christina has four choices for the first fruit and then three remaining choices for the second fruit she picks. But, $$4\times 3$$ is overcounting the number of outcomes since, e.g.:
:strawberry: :watermelon:
is the same as
:watermelon: :strawberry:.

We can correct for the overcounting by dividing by the number of ways to reorder the two fruits that Christina selected, which in this case is $$2!=2$$. There are thus $$4 \times 3 / 2 = 6$$ different outcomes here. We will use the brackets {} to denote a set of objects, where ordering does not matter.
1. {:strawberry:, :watermelon:}
2. {:strawberry:, :banana:}
3. {:strawberry:, :green_apple}
4. {:watermelon:, :banana:}
5. {:watermelon:, :green_apple:}
6. {:green_apple:, :banana:}

More generally, following the math for $$k$$-permutations of $$n$$ in Case 3, the number of combinations of $$k$$ fruits from a basket of $$n$$ fruits ($$k=2$$, $$n=4$$ in this case) is:

$$\frac{n!}{(n-k)! k!}.$$

So the formula is the $$k$$-permutations of $$n$$ divided by $$k!$$ to correct for order not mattering.

This has a special notation:
$$\binom{n}{k} := \frac{n!}{(n-k)! k!},$$
read out loud as "$$n$$ choose $$k$$".

### Case 6. Christina selects two fruit from the fruit basket with four different types of fruit (bananas, strawberries, watermelons, and green apples) and puts them on her tray. Now, Christina can select two of the same fruit if she desires; they do not have to be different fruit. How many outcomes are there? Again, ordering does not matter.

Now Christina is selecting $$k=2$$ fruit, where there are $$n=4$$ different types of fruit to choose from. There is a visual way to understand this problem. As a method to represent a particular outcome, let's group Christina's choice of fruits by fruit and use bars (|) to separate the different types of fruit. We will always list the fruits in the following order: bananas, strawberries, watermelons, and then green apples. 

For example, if she chooses a banana and a watermelon, we represent this as:
:banana: | | :watermelon: |
if she chooses two watermelons:
| | :watermelon: :watermelon: |
if she chooses a watermelon and a green apple:
| | :watermelon: | :green_apple:

That is, we keep a bar symbol to separate the outcomes even if there are no fruits between the bars. This way, no matter what the outcome, there are *always* $$k=2$$ fruits and $$n-1=3$$ bars in our representation of an outcome, for a total of $$k+n-1=5$$ symbols.

From this visual representation, we see that the number of outcomes is equal to the number of ways that we can arrange the $$n-1=3$$ bars in $$k+n-1=5$$ positions (the rest of the positions will be occupied by fruits). This is a multiset permutation, where we are looking for the number of permutations of $$k+n-1$$ symbols, of which $$n-1$$ are indistinguishable bars and the other $$k$$ symbols are fruits, which we also view as indistinguishable since the positions of the bars distinguish the fruits. Thus, the number of $$k$$ combinations of $$n$$ objects with possible repetitions is:
$$\frac{(k+n-1)!}{k! (n-1)!} = \binom{k+n-1}{k}$$

In this particular case, $$\binom{2+4-1}{2}=10$$. To check, we have four more possibilities than in Case 5 above, since we now allow for dupilicates.
1. {:strawberry:, :watermelon:}
2. {:strawberry:, :banana:}
3. {:strawberry:, :green_apple}
4. {:watermelon:, :banana:}
5. {:watermelon:, :green_apple:}
6. {:green_apple:, :green_apple:}
7. {:strawberry:, :strawberry:}
8. {:banana:, :banana:}
9. {:watermelon:, :watermelon:}
10. {:green_apple:, :green_apple:}
